---
layout: post
title: "Vertigo"
---

<section markdown="1">

I had dreams of becoming a monk when I was younger. I fancied myself equal to the task, too, even if I barely understood what monastery life really is about beyond the idealized vignettes I came across from my reading here and there, or knew if there even remained any monasteries anymore other than the ones on the rocky hills of Athos or the rockier deserts of Tibet which I know I will never see in my lifetime. I remember reading St Benedict’s _Rule_ in one feverish sitting, and attempting, in vain, to read the original in Latin: every page, every rule (sterner than the next) holding me in trance despite the book being contrary to the value of personal liberties I based my whole Weltansicht on.

At first I thought, rather naïvely, that it was a longing for order in a chaotic world I was only beginning to discover that drew me to monasticism (or _fantasies_ of it, at least). Yet I was as attracted to the tranquility that permeated from each page of Hesse’s _Glass Bead Game_ as I was to the intrigues that defined Eco’s _Name of the Rose_. The idea of achieving order through blind obedience, in addition, is something I find not only irrational but also deeply repulsive. Still the mechanical rhythm of monastic life — waking up each day at four,[^1] staying in bed in perfect silence until five or six, or ‘if anyone may perhaps want to read, let him read to himself in such a way as not to disturb anyone else;’[^2] then saying the nones, a few minutes for a bowl of porridge (I imagine there would be porridge from too much Dickens) and maybe some milk, then off to work tending the gardens — is oddly comforting; and a perhaps a few more years of disillusion with the ‘outside’ world would be enough to convince me there is no other way to live.

No, it was not order per se that I liked but the notion that one could live one’s life entirely divorced from the world in pursuit of something — be it God or wisdom or anything else entirely. Maybe it is not monasticism as much as hermeticism, or a hermeticism disguised in the trappings of monastic life that I liked: to read for example Burton’s _Anatomy of Melancholy_ and trace each footnote, each reference to the beginning of time, with no care for the world; to learn Elvish or Latin or Old English, knowing full well one would never be able to speak a word of it; to devote oneself to tasks as arcane as the next, without having to justify to anyone the point of it all; to spend one’s day in all of this, with the hours punctuated by Gregorian chants and paternosters until finally it is time for bed.

I am reminded of a poem by Borges,[^3] from notes he wrote (he would have us believe) on the dust jacket of his copy of Beowulf:

> A veces me pregunto qué razones
> me mueven a estudiar sin esperanza
> moved me to study without any hope
> de precisión, mientras mi noche avanza
> of satisfaction, while my night came down,
> la lengua de los ásperos sajones.


Of course Borges had the luxury of old age. Yet the poem’s last lines
possessed a pure, almost foolish, optimism it could only have been written by
someone young.

> Más allá de este afán y de este verso
> me aguarda inagotable el universo.

	
</section>

<section markdown="1">

Maybe it was a longing for God, too: although of course a longing for God is far
too often just an ill-disguised longing for order amidst the
chaos&thinsp;&mdash;&thinsp;and it has been quite some time since I’ve
stopped looking, too, comforting myself with a platitude I have fashioned from
reading Camus: that life is meaningless, and where philosophy is an acceptance
of this very fact, religion is a vain struggle to prove that it could be
otherwise.

I grew up where it is still anathema to voice any doubts about the existence
of an Almighty. But since it is the 21st century, one is reprimanded not by
death or getting one’s tongue cut off but by being labelled simply as an
eccentric, a weirdo. This feels worse: this is Leo X shrugging off
Luther’s _Theses,_ laughing in mild amusement at the quirky
Bavarian, telling his cardinals, ‘Oh for Christ’s sake, let the guy
protest all he wants; it’s just a phase, he’ll get over it
soon.’ Sometimes though the ‘punishment’ surfaces as efforts
at conversion&mdash;proof, they will tell you, of God’s (and thus by
extension, their own) benevolence even to the most wretched. A particular line
stood out for me after hearing it again and again not just from the vicar of our
parish the few times I remember going to church but more tellingly from the
myriad Hillsong-type amateur evangelists I went to school with: ‘The fool
says in his heart, &ldquo;There is no God,&rdquo;’ each word proudly
chanted as if it were the ultimate condemnation. I came to loathe those words
and the people who uttered them; and yet many years later (seven years since I
last entered a church unironically) I could still not shake them off my thoughts
or convince myself how they are by design poisonous to any honest inquiry into
the question of God. To this day I still consider myself
Christian&thinsp;&mdash;&thinsp;or at the very least a Christian atheist in the
mould of Stephen Fry&mdash;not a ‘fool,’ in the language of these
people.

I do not think it is simply cowardice, this inability to form an opinion and
stand fast in it, as much as an admission that it is categorically impossible to
know whether God exists or not. Most people I knew growing up, when confronted
by this question, almost always comes up with their own version of the
apologist’s answer to Pascal’s wager: that if one lives believing
there is a God and dies to find out there is none, one loses nothing; but if one
lives, on the contrary, denying God’s existence, to discover on
one’s death that He does in fact exist, one loses everything.[^4] From
a utilitarian (nay, _rational_) viewpoint this argument makes sense: but
it is not as much a proof of God’s existence as it is a justification of
one’s belief in it. But I cannot accept this argument: I refuse to
predicate my belief in God or in God’s existence in a fear of eternal
damnation&thinsp;&mdash;&thinsp;or even in a fear of the unknown: I refuse to
anchor my belief in God in fear, in my desire for self-preservation, in my own
selfishness.

Yet at the same time I believe it would be as easy to dismiss the _possibility_
that God exists as it is to blindly believe in God’s existence as an
uncontrovertible and self-evident fact. I envy those who, when asked whether God
exists, could answer with a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’ without a moment’s hesitation.
Hilbert warns against those who set out their inquiry with a belief that there
is only so much that we can know, even suggesting, not without arrogance, how
science’s motto should thenceforth be ‘We must know: we _will_ know.’  (Granted,
he was speaking of science in general and of mathematics in particular but his
exhortation is more properly understood as dealing with human knowledge itself
and how we set forth to expand it.) I agree that the pessimism inherent in
professing ‘I don’t know’ or ‘we will never know’ can only be detrimental to
one’s search for the truth, but perhaps this pessimism  is merited: to know (or
to believe) that the universe is infinite and to know (or to believe) that human
knowledge isn’t, is after all to know (or to believe) that mankind’s quest to
understand the universe is doomed from the very beginning.
</section>

<section markdown="1">

But I digress. When I started writing these notes, I was perhaps simply interested in the superficial similarities between monastic life and the self-isolation most everyone has been forced to recently. It was the middle of April, a month into my quarantine. I just finished reading St Augustine’s _Confessions_ — only the third book I was able to complete in the three years since I left university (after Nabokov’s _Lolita_ from a year ago which I have completely forgotten now and Jia Tolentino’s _Trick Mirror_ from just the week before) — and wanted to write a few lines, a status rerum report of this lockdown, as a check to my anxiety (read: sanity). I was too lazy to even think of keeping a diary.

But that was two months ago. April is as foreign, as unrecognizable, to June/July 2020 as the 1960s. I had but lost all sense of time, and would never again understand why we ever put so much importance to it before. I began writing to convince myself that I was not as lost as I felt, that there was a method behind all this madness. But I have failed, and miserably. All I have left are these fragments. Ignari hominumque locorumque erramus vento huc vastis et fluctibus acti.
</section>



[^1]: A bit from _Mrs Maisel_ that’s too funny to pass up: Susie shouting, ‘I got up at 9:30. In the morning. You know the last time I was up at 9:30 in the morning? It was the last time I stayed out all night and got home at 9:30 in the morning.’
[^2]: St. Benedict’s _Rule_, ch. 48, par. 2. 
[^3]: &lsquo;Composición escrita en un ejemplar de la Gesta de Beowulf&rsquo;
[^4]: Pesons le gain et la perte en prenant croix que Dieu est. Estimons ces deux
    cas&#8239;: si vous gagnez vous gagnez tout, et si vous perdez vous ne
    perdez rien&#8239;: gagez donc qu’il est sans hésiter. (Pascal,
    _Pens&eacute;es_)